2
1.2
Motivation
The prevalence of Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD) is rising, as well as the lack of diagnosis of the
disease before the time at which clinical interventions can make a real difference in the world. This
change in renal function is a gradual process and in the early stages of CKD, there may be no
identifiable signs or symptoms; many of those at risk of being diagnosed with the condition will only
have nephron loss when diagnosed [2], [18]. This necessitates the demand for a predictive tool that
can be employed in identifying the high risk patients early on and manage and monitor them with
different types of drugs and changes in the lifestyle before taking them to end stage deterioration [17],
[18].
The workup for this is measurement of blood levels of creatinine, eGFR and urinary albumin to
creatinine ratio [17] periodically in the laboratory. The measurements are episodic and static, are
prone to non-renal effects and cannot be used in resource poor environments [1]. Current screening
systems can't keep up with patients in between screenings and lack much data, including a need for AI
systems that can process larger, more diverse data sets of patients.
The need for the work is related to the computation aspect arising from the intrinsic intractability
problem. When it comes to risk prediction of CKD, issues of high dimensionality of a sparse feature
space, non-existence of a cohort of patients with clinical data and physiological signals gathered from
wearable devices, heterogeneities of different data modalities and high degree of class imbalance all
pose challenges. New architectures introduced by these constraints require non-classical design of
classification and require principled design of architecture in deep learning models: (1) Late Fusion
and (2) Selection of the model based on the calibration. An important computation issue is how to
come up with solutions that can be applied to such real-world data sets.
Wearable devices provide continuous measurement of more general physiological parameters such as
BVP, EDA and skin temperature which have been demonstrated to be sensitive to more general
autonomic and cardiovascular measures relevant to chronic disease state [32], [35]. Use of multimodal
approach in combination with the structured data feature of EHR clinical can build up an enriched
predictive environment as compared to considering only one of them. But there are some practical
engineering problems to be addressed on a systematic basis, such as proxy label alignment, cross
dataset generalization and mismatching sampling rate, to mention a few.
There can be a number of direct hits to a problem's solution. But from a clinical point of view, if there
is a validated early detection tool, nephrologists can find the patients at risk before they start to show
symptoms, thus reducing dialysis burden, and improving the outcome of their quality of life [18], [43].
From a technical perspective, it can be seen as an extension of multimodal deep learning and SHAP
explainability to a relatively less explored field in healthcare that makes pipelines reproducible and
calibrates multimodal models to deliver clinically interpretable or relevant values to the burgeoning
field of explainable healthcare AI models [15], [49]. The project aims to enable the research team
immediately to extend their capabilities in a field where there is a dire demand among both academic
researchers and practitioners of AI in healthcare specially in clinical data engineering as well as deep
learning model design and XAI systems.
1.3
Objectives
The aim of the research is to develop an explainable machine learning and a Deep Learning
framework able to predict the risk of CKD patients from the very early stage with the assistance of
wearable generated physiological data and structured clinical data and a final system that instead of
being an automatic diagnostic system, works as a system able to support clinical decisions.
I.
To prepare and preprocess CKD-relevant clinical datasets from NHANES and MIMIC-IV,
including feature selection, missing-value handling, leakage removal, CKD label construction,
and grouped train-validation-test splitting.
II.
To extract and prepare wearable physiological features from the WESAD dataset using window-
based signal processing for the wearable branch of the system.
III. To develop and compare branch-level prediction models for clinical and EHR data, including
logistic regression with calibration, Random Forest, XGBoost, Tabular MLP, and residual MLP
