39

EP1 (Depth of Knowledge): we needed to use integrated expertise and knowledge in machine
learning, biomedical informatics, and wearable physiology in the course of the project. Modelling
hospital admission required knowledge of the structure of MIMIC, use of ICD-based CKD-proxy
labels, and of features of the laboratory window throughout the admission window. NHANES
had to be merged, labelled by eGFR and care taken to be leakage free for population modelling.
Additionally, there was the need for the interpretation of the data collected from the wearable
branch to be done through a windowing method and using the stress proxy, a common method
for autonomic stress-proxy labelling. Additionally, explainability and calibration were provided,
providing added depth not only to the classification itself. A single undergraduate topic was not
sufficient to cover all layers and synthesis between the two areas of computing and clinical data
was needed.

EP2 (Range of conflicting requirements): A number of engineering tensions were addressed
and bounded. Discrimination and calibration were in conflict with those tree models and
uncalibrated logistic regression showing similar AUROC ~0.77 to 0.76, but poor ECE ~0.25 to
0.20,
and
those
sigmoid
calibrated
showing
poor
AUROC
0.76
and
ECE
0.020.
Selected threshold 0.16 conflicted most screening specificity 0.696 with most recall 0.674.
Multimodal were at odds with data reality as NHANES, MIMIC and WESAD were not patient
aligned and late fusion had to be done on a protocol level. Trade-offs were found between model
fidelity of models and readability, and the least-verbose model which was calibrated logistic
regression was chosen over more intricate ones.

EP3 (Depth of analysis): Evaluation was not limited to check for right-or-wrong. The study
reported AUROC, AUPRC, F1, sensitivity, specificity, ECE and Brier scores and compared
calibrated with uncalibrated models, considered the behaviour of confusion matrices and
evaluated the repeated grouped-split stability; and performed temporal external validation using
later admissions. Explainability was done using SHAP and permutation importance. There have
been no reports of incompatible cohorts, except for branch-specific limitations, meaning that
different cohorts have not been mixed together.

EP4 (Familiarity of Issues): This was not performed using a typical tabular benchmark. There
are differences between the staging of CKD according to KDIGO and ICD proxy labels at
admission. There is limited coverage of creatinine in the MIMIC window of admission in MIMIC.
For physiology, please refer to WESAD, applicable CKD labels are not included. Fusion cannot
be regarded as the multimodal validation at the patient level in the absence of records being
aligned. To avoid exaggerating clinical utility, it was necessary for the doctors to be familiar with
the domain from the onset.

EP6 (Stakeholder involvement): The system is targeting stakeholders in the provision of
chronic kidney disease (CKD) services and hospital risk review: people at risk of developing
CKD, nephrologists and general physicians, nurses, admission teams, hospital quality and
population-health staff, and health informatics teams who would be using any future tool for
making decisions. For their needs, they were solved indirectly, with clinical content in literature,
design of the labels following guidelines, calibrated risk outputs and user presentations that could
happen during the hospital visit, but not in the form of live trials in the hospital or formal
stakeholder workshops. The Streamlit prototype is a way of showing how risk and explanations
might be displayed in the clinical context, but not necessarily deployed stakeholder validation.

EP7 (Interdependence): Subsystems were coupled. This is a dependent chain of processes
ranging from the construction of MIMIC features to training the model, calibration, selection of
thresholds, SHAP analysis and the decision-support prototype. Only exported probabilities can be
used as input for fusion from NHANES and WESAD branches. Reported metrics and prototype
behaviour is impacted by any changes in labelling,splitting,calibration. A consistent primary
model was maintained throughout the evaluation, figures and demonstration with the use of a
reporting lock.
Mapping with Knowledge Profile
This section will be used to link the overall problem and EP1 (multiple times for attaining EP1: K3,
K4, K5, K6 & K8) to our Knowledge Profile.
