22
3.2.4
Multimodal Fusion Strategy
A late fusion of the outputs of the branches is made at probability level. Each branch makes a class
prediction, and the aggregated branch predictions are done using weights based on normalized
AUROC and AUPRC statistics; an alternative combiner, called a logistic-regression meta-learner on
branch probabilities, is also evaluated.
The approach selected is late fusion and the reason for this is that the datasets are not patient-aligned.
There were other options considered, early feature-level fusion and joint end-to-end fusion networks
for multiple modalities, which could in principle learn the modalities' interaction in principle on the
row level but were rejected because these would require creating patient equivalences in the data that
were used for fusion, and would be fabricated, in violation of the no-fabrication principle of this study.
A single-model alternative in which only the features of the MIMIC EHR was put into consideration,
and serves as the backbone of the locked hospital model and Streamlit prototype, but because of its
inability to address the multimodal integration objective, it was not selected as a separate research
design. The positive side of late fusion is that it works without loss of functionality under a structural
constraint of independent cohorts, it is independently trainable, auditable and replaceable and also has
very low inference cost as fusion is taking place in the probability space. The downside is that, like, if
you have aligned data, then there could be cross-modal feature interactions that a joint representation
could learn but it can't learn here due to late fusion, this is explicitly stated. These modularities are
clinically and deployable beneficial: the hospital, the population and the wearable branches can
independently be improved when new data occurs, but due to the lack of an aligned cohort, it is not a
clinically validated multimodal renal diagnosis system, but rather a deployable fusion protocol
reported under proxy conditions.
3.2.5
Model Architecture and Selection
Several models were explored for each of the tabular branches: calibrated logistic regression, Random
Forest (400 trees, max depth 16, weighted 0.5 subsample for each class), XGBoost (400 estimators,
max depth 5, learning rate 0.05, histogram method, positive class weighted), tabular MLP (128/64
hidden units, ReLU, dropout 0.2, AdamW 1 × 10-3), and tabular Residual Network (128-dim
projection, three layer-normalized residual blocks, AdamW 8 × 10-4, 50 epochs). Random Forest
window-level statistics on wearable branch. The locked primary model for the hospital EHR branch
was logistic regression with Platt (sigmoid) calibration of the validation prediction.
The downside of the selected approach would be the training of deep tabular networks as opposed to
good tree ensembles and the linear model as the main deep MIMIC classifier that is always calibrated.
Recurrent and transformer-based EHR sequence models were considered, but end to end sequence
models were not since EHR sequence modelling has been successfully applied in longitudinal studies
[25], [28] but were felt to be very susceptible to over-fitting in this small cohort with a tabular
admission-level representation where laboratories were already aggregated within the admission
window, and do not substantially improve upon strong tabular baselines [23], [24]. The tree
ensembles and deep networks that comprised the trained tabular models however gave slightly better
ranking on the MIMIC test partition while calibrated logistic regression was much better, especially
with regard to the most important criterion of ECE which is essential for a risk oriented decision
support [14], [47]. For the wearable branch, Random Forest was the better algorithm as it can learn
nonlinear patterns from low-dimensional window statistics without requiring large CKD-labelled
wearable cohorts. The advantage of the main model selected is the low serving time, low and stable
probabilities and easy understandable; the disadvantage is the slightly lower ranking results as
compared with the optimal nonlinear models. Going on the positive side, the linear primary model is
very cheap to train and deploy, which helps in the prototyping of Streamlit, and any batch-scoring
pipeline generated at the end of the model trainings. Clinically calibrated (not just "good rank")
probabilities are the appropriate way to prioritize for decision support, since the clinician's goal is to
have a good estimate of the risk – see [14] for details.
