5
Chapter 2
Background
The key area of focus of the chapter is the literature background and context investigation where
important literature work that will form a vital base for the proposed CKD risk prediction framework
is explored. It covers the cutting edge prediction of CKD, AI in health care from EHR (Electronic
Health Records), Wearables to monitor in health care, Multimodal learning, explainable AI and
related prior works and not yet explored research gaps in this project.
2.1
Introduction
Because it is not easily diagnosed and only picked up in later stages of the condition, there are many
people around the world who suffer from Chronic Kidney Disease, in particular those living with
moderate to severe kidney damage. Chronic kidney disease is under-diagnosed in the early phases of
the condition due to the limitations of time on time laboratory based screening, although it affects a
significant proportion of adults around the world. Much research has been devoted to the application
of machine learning and deep learning approaches to clinical data to predict the risk of CKD, with a
pattern from basic classifiers based on structured records, to more complicated architectures based on
EHR and time series data [1], [7], [23]. Imaging-based CKD approaches have also been reviewed [4],
[12], but they are outside the scope of this tabular and wearable physiology framework. Current
strategies are mostly based on only one data type and do not integrate complementary data provided
by different types of wearable physiological sensors that are capable of providing continuous real-
time measurements that are relevant for monitoring patient's chronic disease [32], [36]. Additionally,
deep learning models have not been sufficiently discussed in terms of interpretability in the clinical
practice [46], [49], which is the only criterion required to apply deep learning in practice despite their
outstanding predictive power. The chapter covered literature on the above aspects and stated the
limitations of existing system and the research gaps which trigger to develop the proposed system.
2.2
Literature Review
The previous methods focused to handle structured clinical data and use the traditional classification
algorithms of machine learning for prediction of CKD. Sawhney et al. [1] compared the performance
of deep models and classical models using a UCI style CKD data composed of 400 patients and some
clinical/laboratory attributes. They had used PyTorch with their deep MLP technique and the
technique achieved 100% test accuracy, achieving a better performance compared to the SVM and
Naive Bayes method. The results are only applicable to a small size, carefully designed tabular set,
and cannot be directly applied to a more diverse set or extended to a more class balanced and missing
EHR set. Almansour et al. [19] compared the performance of ANN with SVM for the same data set of
400 patients with CKD and found that the accuracy of ANN (99.75%) is much better than that SVM
(97.75%) while the most significant is creatinine (cr) and urea (urea). The latter three works [20], [21],
[22] by Wang, Shih and Krishnamurthy respectively, employed other additional feature engineering
approaches but were limited in their cross-sectional data from single acquisition sites and not taking
into account temporal changes, which would be important to capture the true complexities of clinical
CKD progression. Some attempts were made to indicate that selection of appropriate features is very
crucial for achieving high classification accuracy in case of class imbalance condition [11] and
Dashtban et al. [13] showed that one of the drawbacks of these classifiers when experimented on new
cohorts other than the experimented cohorts is fragility at population shift. Khan et al. [10] compared
several machine learning techniques—including tree-based methods such as J48 and NBTree—on a
UCI CKD dataset and reported that CHIRP achieved the highest classification accuracy (99.75%)
