36
Chapter 5
Engineering Standards and Design
Challenges
For the proposed CKD risk prediction framework, the engineering standard as well as the
societal,ethical issues are discussed here, along with the project management and financial analysis of
the project. Complex engineering mapping of the project is also discussed.
5.1
Compliance with the Standards
Not all standards are listed, only those relevant to this CKD risk prediction research project are
discussed. The section introduces software tools, computing environment and data-handling practices
that actually exist in the implemented system. If applicable, the alternatives are identified and why the
chosen alternative is preferred is provided. The decision support system to take place in the
production hospital is defined as a reproducible research system instead of a validated medical-device
and should not be bound by regulatory standards of medical-device hospital deployment; those
standards are not addressed in this final-year design project.
5.1.1
Software Standards
With Python 3.12 and PEP 8 conventions, most processing, logistic regression, and tree baselines,
calibration, and evaluation are written within the main MIMIC branch; PyTorch provides the ability to
add tabular MLP and ResMLP baselines and XGBoost provides the ability to add gradient-boosted
baselines. All metrics, SHAP outputs and any frozen model artifacts are stored in CSV, JSON and
pickle. The locked primary is explainable using SHAP. Fixed random seeds, grouped splits, modular
pipelines of branches and a fixed reporting lock ensure that the reproducibility is maintained. There
was no use of any proprietary tools or LIME, or R-only stacks.
5.1.2
Hardware Standards
The system was designed, and tested on a regularly used undergraduate research workstation. The
main hospitals classifier is a simple tabular classifier, dependent upon no specialised accelerator
equipment. The main pipeline can still be implemented on the central processing unit as heavier
neural baselines would benefit from the use of graphics processing if available. The need for
computation mainly comes from the support of big data collected locally from various public or
research clinical and wearable devices. No special cardiac sensor or dedicated clinical or hospital
computers were used.
5.1.3
Communication Standards
Data flows through as abstract research products in the form of structured data from preprocessing
through modelling, evaluation and demonstration. Clinical and wearable inputs are sourced from
public datasets to tabular feature representations, multimodal integration is done at branch probability
level and not by a shared patient record system. The decision-support prototype is a local research
interface that loads the precomputed model outputs for demonstration. No live hospital interface with
the application programming interfaces or full interoperability with the electronic health records has
been undertaken yet and will be incorporated into future work.
