21
NHANES cycles when the primary rule is applied, the availability of albuminuria in merged
NHANES tables was limited to consider an alternative rule of eGFR alone, or eGFR and albuminuria
thresholds. These steps are very inexpensive and can be repeated in the computer. Determinate
processing with explicit rules to be checked and audited during deployment can be helpful as every
transformation can be versioned and replayed on new admissions without being re-derived because of
missing documentation of the rules.
3.2.3
Feature Engineering
Engineering of features is modality specific. All the fields in the clinical use and EHR feature parts
are structured, including demographic, admission, insurance, race, gender, length of stay, and
laboratory; the categorical variables are one-hot, the numerical variables are train-only fitted and
standardized. The wearable branch window process is to transform raw signal data into statistical
information that is mean, standard deviation, minimum and maximum values of data in each window
separately extracted from BVP, EDA, TEMP and Accelerometer magnitude signals.
Selected approach prefer interpretable features, structured features and hand-summarized, wearable
windows. An end-to-end convolutional or recurrent signal encoder was considered for modelling the
wearable branch, but was rejected due to the small size of the WESAD dataset and lack of CKD labels,
which would lead to an encoder overfitting and being unable to be validated against a renal outcome
[5], [29]. Even another idea, which was to pass the raw sequence whose length is fixed directly to the
deep network was rejected for the same reasons of amount of data and mismatch of effects of different
labels. The benefits of the statistical window features are both their robustness and the fact that they
only have a few parameters; the drawback is that subtle temporal evolutions and cross channel
interactions in the window may be washed out. Windowed is lightweight computation and
programmer-friendly for the deployment of prototypes on typical hardware. On a clinical level, the
structured and interpretable features are consistent with practitioners understanding and reasoning
about laboratory information and summary vital signs, and the features on the wearable are a proxy
for physiological stress, but not a labelled predictor of CKD.
Figure 3.6: Sample WESAD Wrist Signal Window
