6
among the evaluated models.
Extremely robust predictive models were developed when deep learning was applied to EHR data.
Developed by Miotto et al. [24] is a three-layer stacked denoising autoencoder (DeepPatient) trained
on approximately 700,000 patient records given by Mount Sinai that achieved better AUC-ROC
values, ranging from 0.659 for the unprocessed feature baseline to 0.773, demonstrating a 15%
improvement along with better accuracy (15%) and F score (54%). Choi et al. [25] proposed Doctor
AI, an attention-based recurrent neural network model that has a structure of two-level attention
which was tested on 14 million clinical visits from 263,000 patients with the AUROC of heart failure
prediction as 0.8705, 0.8256 for MLP and 0.7900 for logistic regression respectively. Lipton et al. [29]
used a MIMIC clinical time series data to test the performance of LSTM networks against that of
plain zero imputation for prediction of multiple labels associated with the diagnosis of the patient, and
showed that it could outperform the MLP baselines when trained with hand-curated features with a
best micro-averaged AUROC of 0.8730. A deep learning model by Rajkomar et al. [23] with over 46
billion ESR data points from two hospital systems was able to achieve AUROC of 0.75–0.77 for the
prediction of 30-day readmission; the model of 0.85–0.86 for the prediction of a long length of stay
and 0.93–0.95 for the prediction of inpatient mortality outperformed the traditional clinical models
and had a frequency-weighted AUROC of 0.90 for discharge diagnosis. Many of the challenges of
utilizing clinical deep learning are still open and underscored by Shickel et al. [28] with the most
obvious challenges being: temporal modelling of irregular longitudinal recording, handling
missingness and generalizing across cohorts. Although all these improvements have been made, all
the DL models presented here in this paper were found to be single-modality and no attempts were
made to fuse extra-hospital physiological signals.
Wearable health monitoring devices carry with them a qualitatively different type of data with regard
to physiological information; the data is continuous, longitudinal and taken in real life. This study, by
Dunn et al. [32] used more than 150 derived features of these vitals and trained two different models,
random forest and LASSO, to achieve the following: a longitudinal study of 54 patients showed that
these wearables can predict clinical lab measurements (e.g. hematocrit, hemoglobin, red blood cell
count, and absolute monocyte count) with lower prediction error. Presently observed finding is
pertinent to this area of CKD as anemia is quite common complication with renal insufficiency and
hematocrit and hemoglobin are indicators of anemia. Banaee et al. [35] explored the existing data
mining algorithms suitable to the data streams generated by the wearables sensors and how they can
be adapted into useful algorithms to detect the anomalies in the physiological data to monitor chronic
diseases. Steinhubl et al. [34] envisioned that usage of mobile health would be on-going and would
provide detection of clinically relevant changes not captured during clinics visits. Consumer wearable
modalities are signals that have been studied by Bent et al [33] who have pointed out that the
physiology-state-estimation is best achieved on signals such as BVP, EDA and ST. Later on,
Binsawad [9] did a research work on prediction of CKD using Optimized Forest model and compared
it with several traditional machine learning models as baseline which showed sensitivity and
specificity values more than several baseline models on the features extracted using the ECG signals.
It shows that even non-WESAD signals like ECG, known as its inputs can be used for a renal risk
model especially in absence of structured labels at the level of the sensor. A challenge that faced all
the wearables studies of CKD analyzed was that there were no validated CKD labels that made use of
the wearables technology, and researchers were forced to resort to proxy tasks, like stress or CVS
detection.
A capability that comes up as one of the identified opportunities is the one of combining multiple
datasets using a multitude of modalities, when it comes to AI in healthcare context. A detailed
taxonomy of multimodal machine learning was put forward by Baltrušaitis et al. [36] which
categorizes approaches in three types such as approaches with a fusion in the representation space,
approaches with translation, approaches with data alignment, and approaches with co-learning.
Patient-level data alignment as a key practical challenge in the deployment of multimodal models.
One of the earliest works to indicate that multi-modal training of the same model with still images,
audio, and video can be useful to enhance feature representations was that provided by Ngiam et al.
[37]. However, there are no such systems with a specific interest to combine structured clinical
records present in EHRs with wearable physiological signals in prediction of risks of CKD, showing a
clear problem that motivates the proposed work [1], [13].
