42
Chapter 6
Conclusion
This chapter gives a summary of the work done in this research, discusses the limitations of the
proposed CKD risk prediction framework and points the way for future work. It is proposed to be a
research framework to be used as a tool to help with a decision and not a separate clinical diagnostic
system.
6.1
Summary
Combining population clinical data (NHANES) with multimodal, wrist wearable physiological data
(WESAD stress proxy) as well as multimodal data late fusion via probability level and SHAP
explainability were explored as ancillary research decision support to the multimodal CKD risk
prediction system. The Primary locked model which was sigmoid calibrated logistic regression
classifier for MIMIC admission had a test AUROC of 0.761, F1 accuracy metric value of 0.415,
sensitivity of 0.674, specificity of 0.696 and ECE value of 0.020 when threshold value was set at 0.16.
This provided a similar level of discrimination to uncalibrated and treelike approaches as above, but
with significantly better probability reliability measures; uncalibrated logistic regression discriminated
about as well AUROC ~0.761, ECE 0.249 while treelike approaches of about the same quality
achieved a somewhat higher AUROC ~0.768 but much lower probability reliability measures. test
discrimination was high for NHANES logistic regression in separate cohorts and the AUROC value
for proxy task was 0.764 for WESAD cohort. This was because it was considered to be a late fusion,
and with no evidence of patient level multimodal CKD benefit proxy AUROC ~0.50. Temporal
validation and grouping was done but MIMIC discrimination was not affected. Key risk drivers were
found to be: age, insurance, race and admission context
by the global SHAP Analysis. The risk
values that were calculated were plotted in streamlit for MIMIC branch. Rather the project overall
results is an explainable pipeline risk-modelling for admission calibrated for public research data for
research decision support not in actual clinical practice.
6.2
Limitation
While the framework exhibits valuable research evidence, there are some limitations of the framework.

Dataset limitations: The evidence for the primary hospitals is obtained from only one centre
(MIMIC-IV). Public datasets such as NHANES, MIMIC-IV and WESAD are not overlapping,
meaning that no same patient multimodal fusion can be validated. WESAD does not have any
CKD labelling, and only has a stress-versus-baseline physiology proxy. NHANES is based on a
single cycle survey design and a single visit for the labelling of CKD instead of confirmed
longitudinal disease. The laboratory coverage in the admission window is less with restrictions
on availability of creatinine in MIMIC.

Model limitations: MIMIC discrimination is moderate, but the screening operating point is at
the cost of a high number of false positive cases. Limited search for hyperparameters was
performed and there was no external benchmark run on the same splits with published CKD
systems. Late fusion does not support acquisition of cross-modal processing of features. The
wearable and fusion limbs do not yield renal outcome prediction benefit for individual patients.

Computational limitations: The tables in the bigger hospital are voluminous and need a lot of
local storage and processing. Primary model is CPU-feasible, optional GPUs are used for mainly
neural baselines and for branch training. No production level serving or monitoring system was
provided.

Clinical limitations: The system was never deployed or prospective evaluated and not expertly
