23
Table 3.4: Branch models and key hyperparameters.
Branch
Model role
Algorithm
Key settings
MIMIC (primary)
Locked classifier
Calibrated logistic regression
(logreg_sigmoid_cal)
Sigmoid (Platt) calibration
on validation data
MIMIC &
NHANES
Baselines
Random Forest
400 trees, max depth
16, balanced_subsample
MIMIC &
NHANES
Baselines
XGBoost
400 estimators, max depth
5, lr 0.05, hist, positive-
class weighting
MIMIC &
NHANES
Deep tabular
Tabular MLP
128→64, ReLU, dropout
0.2, AdamW 1×10⁻³, 40
epochs
MIMIC &
NHANES
Deep tabular
Tabular ResMLP
Projection to 128 + 3×
residual blocks, AdamW 8
×10⁻⁴, 50 epochs
WESAD (proxy)
Wearable branch
Random Forest
Window statistics input;
subject-grouped holdout
evaluation
3.2.6
Explainable AI Integration
With the help of SHAP, the prototype introduces explainability and, per case, the user can view its
linear contribution of the features displayed on the admission [15] [48].
SHAP (SHapley Additive exPlanations) is the approach selected. The other main local explanation
methods that were considered here were LIME (Local Interpretable Model-agnostic Explanations) [44]
which introduces local surrogate sampling that can lead to flaky behavior when sampling different
perturbations and simulation runs, but that was not desired when implementing the pipeline for the
linear and tree based models explored here one can compute exact or semi-exact SHAP [15], [48] that
provide locally consistent attributions based on a common additive feature-attribution framework.
Although features level SHAP was discussed for tabular deep models by comparing against feature-
level Grad-CAM and attention level visualization, it was deprioritized due to the linear nature of the
locked primary model as well as the structured nature and nameability of the clinical features from
imaging. The most appealing aspect of SHAP is that it provides faithful, comparable explanations at
both the individual and global level which can be easily used for auditing individual admissions and
for the drivers at the cohort level in the MIMIC branch. Unfortunately, it comes at the price of more
computation compared to the single surrogate fit, but is well tolerated for the number and size of
features and models. Feature-level attributions are used flexibly, in conjunction with domain
knowledge, which is important to achieve successful adoption of decision-support systems [39], [49],
[50]; in the prototype interface, the attributions are precomputed on the global level and light on a
local level, meaning that they are quickly generated when the interface is displayed. One disadvantage
is that explanations only tell of relationships present in the training distribution, and they are not
inherently causal mechanisms and do not replace the medical doctors' judgment [49].
3.2.7
Training Procedure
After training one time on each of the grouped training partitions with each model, hyperparameters
and model parameters are selected on the validation partition(s) and the performance is measured. The
models are calibrated with a sigmoid
transformation fitted on the model ’ s predictions on the
validation partitions: calibrated main hospital model, class-balancing is used for training tree
ensembles to deal with the small number of samples in the positive class, training deep tabular models
with adamW optimizer for a fixed number of epochs and monitoring validation.
Subjects or participants are split in cohorts and no subject or participant exists in more than one cohort
as it is showed in Table 3.5. NHANES and MIMIC data are further divided in a 60:20:20 stratification
