13
Figure 3.1: Overall architecture of the proposed multimodal CKD risk-prediction framework
There are three kinds of public data sources that provide data: population-scale clinical data collected
by NHANES [16] and hospital EHR data from MIMIC-IV [6] and wearable physiological data
collected by WESAD public data sharing repository [5]. Given that they represent different
populations and cannot be connected on an individual patient basis, each is considered a separate
branch, and follows its own preprocessing steps which involves table merging, leakage removal,
imputation, standardization and train – validation – test splitting to prevent subject leakage, using
CKD-EPI eGFR and albuminuria thresholds [17], [18]. We then have modality specific features such
as structure admitting, modality specific demographic features on the clinical branch, windowed
statistical descriptors of BVP, EDA, temperature, and accelerometer features on the wearable branch,
which we use as a proxy for a CKD labeled source.
For each branch, there are a number of models, including logistic regression with calibration, Random
Forest and XGBoost and deep tabular models; the locked model in the EHR branch is the logistic
regression with calibration which is used to generate well calibrated probabilities [14]. These
probabilities at the branches are then combined at the level of the probabilities as an integration
protocol like that of the non-aligned data [36]. A SHAP-based-component reports feature attributions,
discrimination and calibration metrics such as AUROC, AUPRC, F1, sensitivity, specificity, brier and
ECE are employed to assess the system with a multi-seed and a temporal robustness check.
The system is divided into four blocks, which are respectively input and pre-processing, model
inference with the frozen primary model, SHAP explanation and explanation presentation interface
from system design perspective. The data is only transmitted from the computer to the user only one
way; the system returns a calibrated CKD risk estimate and supporting explanation outputs to the user;
inputs are admission-level features entered or selected through the prototype interface.
3.1.3
Functional and Nonfunctional Requirements
Functional requirements specify what the system to be designed must do, based on conditions. They
detail the actions the system needs to take to collect health data, and subsequently, in the next phases
of health data preprocessing, modelling, fusion, explainability and reporting to derive calibrated
health risk outputs that may be presented to a decision-maker. These requirements for this project
involve all the various branches of the multimodal research pipeline, the locked primary hospital EHR
model, the probability calibration and the SHAP based explanation, in addition to the Streamlit
prototype to showcase the results. System's functional requirements:
