17
3.1.4
Data Flow Diagram
The Data Flow Diagram illustrates the flow of data from various external data sources into the
proposed framework for CKD prediction with outputs for prediction, explanation, storage and
reporting. The main external entities include the public datasets and system user. NHANES supplies
population-level clinical information, MIMIC-IV supplies hospital EHR and laboratory information
and WESAD supplies wearable physiological information. A user only interacts with the user
interface of the prototype and asks for input features, and they will get prediction and explanation
outputs.
The inputs consist of mainly clinical and demographic features obtained from the NHANES,
admission level EHR and laboratory features obtained from the MIMIC-IV, and wearable signal
windows obtained from the WESAD. The inputs go through an additional layer of data ingestion, data
preprocessing, and feature extraction, and then the branch-level prediction. Processed feature sets for
modelling and also the model check points for the trained model for prediction. Because the data sets
are not patient-aligned, the fusion process isn't patient-aligned either, meaning that in cases where
there is a valid output, only branch-level probabilities are combined.
Both processes, calibrated CKD risk prediction and SHAP-based explainability, return outputs:
namely risk probabilities and feature-importance outputs and SHAP-based attributions. These results
are saved along with evaluation and fusion results and displayed using a prototype interface. The
results to be produced as the final outputs of the project are arrangement of CKD risk scores,
explanation results, reporting outputs for the research evaluation and demonstration for the decision
support, but not for autonomous diagnosis.
Figure 3.2: Data Flow Diagram of the proposed CKD risk prediction system
3.1.5
UI Design
It also has a research prototype built from the example platform Streamlit and ready to be used on the
actual branch of the CKD risk prediction system, which is built to the primary clinical data base
system MIMIC-IV. Helping the interface to comprehend the different calibration of risk estimate and
the different explanation outputs at the admission level. It is designed to be used in demonstration and
visualization for the purpose of decision support of the thesis, not in clinical diagnosis and direct
medical decision making.
