19
The third tab, Global SHAP, shows a summary of feature-importance provided a fixed test-set, which
was obtained from the primary model. This visualization of the explanation does not vary based on
the individual admissions, but rather summarizes the most influential features when looking across the
admissions in the held-out test set, unlike the local explanation chart in the prediction view. Case-
level and population-level feature influence is represented in the both the local and the global
explanation views, respectively, and both can be used to obtain interpretability.
Figure 3.5: UI Design Global SHAP Tab
The overall flow of users is straightforward. The user carefully goes through the same procedure as
described above and chooses one of the example admissions, or manually enters admission data,
clicks the risk estimation and can then see the navigation which is calibrated, as an explanatory factor,
together with the CKD risk score. For now, the current branch of MIMIC displays the primary branch
of MIMIC and not live interactive training index as seen in WESAD or multi-modal fusion.
3.2
Detailed Methodology and Design
This section describes in detail methodology and design of the proposed multi modal CKD decision –
support framework. Highlighted key design decisions with regards to the selection of datasets, pre-
processing and leakage control, construction of labels, feature extraction, training of models and
calibration of the probability, late fusion, explainability and the research prototype. For each area, a
brief description of the selected approach, a description of any approaches considered but not selected,
a justification for excluding those approaches and significant compromises that were made between
validity of the approach, computational cost, usability and interpretability of results and suitability to
the research in clinical decision support are provided.
3.2.1
Dataset Description
The framework takes advantage of three datasets publicly available and consists of three modalities.
The population level clinical and demographic data are derived from NHANES (2013-2014) which
consists of 4702 model participants with 74 features, with 6.55% of participants labelled CKD-
positive of kidney disease patients having eGFR<60 mL/min/1.73 m2, with the CKD-EPI 2021 race-
free equation [16], [17], [18]. MIMIC-IV v3.1 contains the data in the hospital Electronic Health
Record (EHR), which include ~30,000 hospital admissions with 68 features with a positive rate of
~15.23%, including 8 measurements obtained from the hospitals laboratories in the window of
hospital admission (bicarbonate, chloride, creatinine, hemoglobin, platelet, potassium, sodium, and
urea nitrogen values [6]. WESAD is a dataset comprising of wrist worn data from 15 participants with
