29
prototype, namely a Streamlit web application. The interface features a calibrated CKD risk prediction,
user-specified thresholding, rich examples of patient admissions in the MIMIC cohort, manual entry
of risk factors, and a Global SHAP Summary tab for the held-out test set. This prototype does not
feature NHANES, WESAD, or live multimodal fusion, and the hospital model is read-locked to
support an auditable decision-support workflow. Throughout a research-only disclaimer is displayed,
the system is meant for risk-states presentation and explanation purposes, not self-diagnosis and
therapeutic suggestions.
4.2
Testing and Evaluation
4.2.1
Validation Strategy
The model validation process was designed and developed on a staged approach, in order to provide
to a certain extent a level of independence and to reduce potential optimism bias in the process and
ultimately in provision of decision support reports. The methodological approach that was used was
grouped holdout evaluation with these separation performed as disjoint(user level grouping) and
disjoint(subject level grouping), respectively between NHANES and MIMIC-IV. The training and
validation data were used for pre-processing the data, fitting the model, calibration and setting
thresholds while the held out test partition was used for a final evaluation.
3 different validation designs were added to the main branch of the hospital. With repeating the
experiments some times each time with different random-seeds for the subject-groups, the stability of
the performance with the resampled subject-groups was investigated. For temporal external validation,
the subjects were divided into training,validation and test groups according to the first admission and
models of the training group were used for the prediction of the test admission to approximate the
temporal generalization. From the inability to perform the experiments at the patient-level between
NHANES, MIMIC-IV, and WESAD, the multimodal integration path was assessed using a branch
level proxy, and as such the multimodal integration results represent a demonstration of integration
protocol, rather than proof of multimodal CKD detection in a prospective setting.
To study the window records of the WESAD, a proxy label was adopted and used separately in the
wearable branch. The NHANES and MIMIC databases were independent; therefore, the patient level
testing was carried out separately for the two databases.
4.2.2
Evaluation Metrics
The performance of models were evaluated in a combination of discrimination, classification and
calibration aspects. To take the imbalanced CKD related labels into account, discrimination was
assessed based on area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUROC) and the area under
the precision, recall curve (AUPRC). The accuracy, F1-score, sensitivity and specificity at the
selected operating points in the validation were used to classify the threshold. The quality of
calibration was assessed using the expected calibration error (ECE) and brier score since it is
important that probabilities are trustworthy in order to make decisions based on risks [14], [47]. For
locked primary hospital model, the number of items counted is from the held out test set which is
shown in the confusion matrix. Explainability was measured with the help of the SHAP of the main
classifier [15], [48].
4.2.3
Testing Procedures
Testing was set up at 5 steps of the procedure. Data-integrity testing was conducted and integrity of
the split and collective grouping, along with the integrity of imputation/scaling being applied only to
the training data, was confirmed. In this model-comparison test all the candidate classifiers were
trained in the same manner with same pre-processing method and a comparison of classifiers was
done on the validation data before reporting the test-set results. All three of the models – the
uncalibrated hospital logistic regression model, the model calibrated by sigmoid function, and the
model calibrated by isotonic method were compared and locked the primary reporting model. Various
