IV
ABSTRACT
CKD (Chronic Kidney Disease) is a big problem all over the world, and is often only associated
with the affected kidney when it is at an advanced stage and there is not a lot that can be done.
Most of the computational approaches involve a unique modality, and do not typically combine
leakage-aware evaluation, and explainability in a single, reproducible pipeline for decision
support. In this thesis, multi-modal solution using clinical records, population biochemistry and
wearable physiology to predict the risk of CKD in the early stage using explainable AI is
proposed. Three branches are created: NHANES is used for modelling the population; MIMIC-
IV is used for admission level hospital risk stratification; and a proxy of stress-physiology
(WESAD) is used for feature extraction as the labels of CKD are not available in the WESAD
cohort. This also includes providing grouped splits at the subject level and providing
standardized feature engineering, and explicit labeling from population or from hospital proxies.
Calibrated logistic regression, gradient-boosted trees, and random forests and tabular neural
networks have been tested; in late fusion, which does not involve any cross-cohort patient
alignment, the probability of the trees is combined by following a published protocol. The main
empirical finding is on the admission branch of the MIMIC: post-hoc calibration significantly
improves the probability reliability, compared with baselines that aren't calibrated, while
showing competitive discrimination. Global SHAP analysis on the MIMIC held-out test set
shows that the top four factors are the insurance, race, admission characteristics and age. With a
prototype built in Streamlit, we also introduced thresholds, and offer explanations to
stakeholders on a local and global level. While NHANES and WESAD branches were tested
separately, no significant CKD detection advantage of multi-modal fusion was found. The work
is a purely research decision support framework to target leakage-aware, calibrated and
explainable multi-modal hospital risk modelling.
