27
Chapter 4
Implementation and Results
This chapter presents the implementation environment, testing and evaluation procedures, and
empirical results of the proposed multimodal CKD risk prediction framework. It reports branch-wise
model performance, calibration and explainability analysis, supplementary validation outcomes, and
the research decision-support prototype demonstration.
4.1
Environment Setup
This section outlines the hardware, software setup, experimental setup, detailed results of the
proposed framework, the performance of the models, the confusion matrix results, the explainable
SHAP approach, the robustness test results, and finally, the clinical decision support-prototype
demonstration. All outcomes are presented as research decision support evidence and are not evidence
of clinically validated outcomes of deployment.
4.1.1
Hardware and Software Environment
Development and evaluation have been done on a local workstation with Python 3.12, in an isolated
virtual environment and used a Jupyter Notebook tool as a reproducible experimentation environment
for development. The implementation stack consisted of pandas and NumPy for data manipulation;
scikit-learn for data-preprocessing, classical models and calibration; PyTorch for tabular deep
networks and baseline methods using gradient-boosted models (XGBoost); and Streamlit for the
prototype of the decision-support system. Often tabular deep models were found to be useful and were
deployed with a specific GPU, but if one didn't exist these models ran on CPU, hence the locked
primary hospital classifier is a calibrated logistic regression, which means it isn't sensitive to this.
Primary MIMIC admission model has been analysed to check for explainability of the result using the
tool SHAP. All models were trained and the entire data sequence was exported to a serialized format
for later use for reporting and loading into a prototype.
4.1.2
Hyperparameter Configuration
The same experimental protocol was performed in all the branches, for comparability. Categorical
was one-hot encoded while numeric variables were median imputed and standardized based on mean
and standard deviation data from the training partition only. Grouped 60:20:20 train–validation–test
splits of NHANES and MIMIC-IV on participant and subject identifier, respectively, and with random
seed set to 42 were used for evaluation, with a subject-grouped 75:25 train–test holdout applied to the
wearable proxy branch. The F1-maximization policy was used for choosing the classification
threshold on the validation partition for the locked primary model (threshold = 0.16).
The baseline and primary hospital model was logistic regression, balanced class weighting, and a
higher iteration limit and was then calibrated using sigmoid on the validation predictions to get the
locked model logreg_sigmoid_cal. Random Forest and XGBoost were trained with 400 estimators,
max_depths 16 and 5 and imbalance aware weighting. For Tabular multilayer perceptron models 128
and 64 sized hidden layers were used with Dropout of 0.2, AdamW optimization with learning rate 1×
10-3, batchsize 64 and CrossEntropyLoss with 40 training epochs on NHANES and 35 training
epochs in the end MIMIC run. We obtained the model of the residual tabular network with 128 units,
3 layer-norm residual blocks, 0.1 dropout, 8×10-4 learning rate with AdamW, and 50 epochs. The
wearable branch classified window-level BVP, EDA, temperature, and accelerometer statistics, using
a stress versus baseline proxy label, using the Random Forest algorithm. A total of 30,000 admissions
