37
5.2
Impact on Society, Environment and Sustainability
5.2.1
Impact on Life
The clinicians can use the framework to reflect on the CKD risk at the time of an admission using the
calibrated probabilities and provide an explanation why using the SHAP explanation that may be
helpful in implementing earlier follow-up testing if demonstrated in the future. It is not designed for
the diagnostic of CKD nor is it a substitute for either eGFR-based or guidance-based assessment
either, but of course indirectly helpful to patients by better informed clinical review and care [2],[18].
However, there is no package deployed to healthcare providers as it is only a research prototype for
explainer presentation of risks. The remote monitoring user is not directly served, as the wearable
branch is not a WESAD stress test branch, and has not been validated to detect renal stress [5].
5.2.2
Impact on Society & Environment
While it can be evidence-based for digital-health research to gauge early awareness of CKD or
investigate potential opportunities for leveraging routine hospital data as a tool to understand
outcomes or broaden access for those with the disease, it does not move the needle necessarily on
improved outcomes or broadened access to health care. At this time, MIMIC-IV can only be used by
credentialed researchers [6].
If there is impact, then the computer work, process the data set, train and report was mostly done
locally, on the workstation. In comparison to large deep models, the locked primary model has a low
energy. The cost for resources is for the storage of large clinical files. No need for deployment either
in-lab or on-site was necessary.
5.2.3
Ethical Aspects
No patient records were specifically collected for this project and any datasets used are publicly
available and have been de-identified, in compliance to the requirements of research access [6], [16].
Bias can occur due to the strong effect on age, insurance, race and way of admission. SHAP and a
calibration reporting as proposed in [15] and [48] provides explainability. A disclaimer, ‘Research
Only' is included in the prototype and should not be used for the purposes of providing treatment
advice. The tool is for decision support only and clinical accountability is with the clinician [42], [49].
5.2.4
Sustainability Plan
Modular branches and frozen artifacts enable the independent update of data, models and explanations.
The main model is not very costly to operate for research purposes; some other required things for
EHR use in a hospital would not be performed here such as security, governance, and live EHR use.
Future: any iteration of MIMIC, new surveys, or new cohorts of wearable and EHR could be added in
a way that is repeatedly validated, recalibrated, and SHAP reviewed.
5.3
Project Management and Financial Analysis
The project was divided into five different part entitled with phase 1 research and planning, phase 2
data engineering, phase 3 model development, phase 4 explainability and evaluation and Phase 5
integration and thesis submission. It included the pipelines with the verified datasets, full evaluation
artifacts and the Streamlit research prototype for the locked primary model (logreg_sigmoid_cal).
Two members of a team and the team supervisor faculty were responsible for implementing and
analyzing and writing the report. Coordination was done through regular meetings, versioning of the
code and through placing the reporting outputs into a frozen state. The main problems encountered
were delayed access to the data set, data size limitations for large hospital data set, missing
multimodal alignments at patient level in the primary branch and inaccuracies in the probabilities
generated by uncalibrated models in the wearable proxy and fusion branches, which was solved by
early verification of the data set, group the validation, sigmoid calibration for primary branch (hospital
