41
specific hardware purchases.

EA2 Level of interaction: Both at a low level and at a higher level there was interaction.
Human-system level considerations of thresholds and explanations of the risks can be given in
the prototype, allowing room for experimentation. The demonstration interface uses the training
results. Data access for data collected from these hospitals and the survey was controlled by
PhysioNet's and CDC's terms of data use. Implementation of live EHR exchange was not done.

EA3 Innovation: The project offers a multi-modal CKD framework with non-aligned public
cohorts as research innovation along with a Decision-Support Demonstration whose outcome of
the evaluations is connected by a reproducible Artifacts Chain as primary research innovation.

EA4 Consequences for society and environment: The findings might be utilized to suggest
guidelines for future research on learning of clinical awareness of AI and early-risk of CKD. If it
solely affected the use of electrical energy in computing or storage of data sets then there would
be no environmental effects. The reason is that as yet, the system has not been applied to clinical
practice, but just as a potential benefit, years of time are still to come until the society can reap
the benefits. An ethical framing, calibration, and explainability reduces risk of misusage of the
black box which may lead to wrong use [49].
5.5
Summary
Standards in engineering, social and ethical aspects, project management, cost considerations, and
being able to map to complex engineering criteria, were all discussed in this chapter. It is built as a
system with open-source software, local execution of software, and serialized communication of
artifacts between the system viewed as a support for research decisions not as a clinical deployment.
In total, there is the potential of societal benefit, computational environmental impact, personal ethical
comfort through use of public data, calibration, SHAP transparency, and explicit prototype limits.
Branches and the freezes of outputs are modular, enabling sustainability. Low project cost as all of the
necessary hardware, software and datasets were available or free. This multidisciplinary design, with
firm calibration and multimodal scope trade-offs, evaluation of multiple constraints, intimate
knowledge of clinical data, and a presentation tailored for the stakeholder and coupled pipeline
elements all meet the purpose of fulfilling complex engineering and activity requirements. These all
contribute to making the platform a reproducibly, responsibly bounded CKD risk research platform.
