20
each time-series divided into 578 windows with features from blood volume pulse (BVP),
electrodermal activity (EDA), skin temperature (TEMP), and accelerometer (ACC) [5].
To this end three existing publicly available datasets around population, hospital and physiological
modalities will be leveraged. The only other alternative considered was obtaining a collection of a
single, proprietary cohort of the three modalities for the same patients, but this was not selected
because there was no publicly available cohort and, because of the time frame and ethical concerns of
a final year design project, it was deemed impractical to collect such a cohort. A second alternative,
which was MIMIC only, was discarded as it would drown out wearing populations and sizes of
interest that motivated the multimodal research question, but were substantially only MIMIC, even
though MIMIC was not the main branch of the prototype for reporting and decision support built with
the lock. The good news about the public data sets is that they are reproducible, large and have an
ethical approval; the bad news and critical limitation is that the three types of data sets are from
different types of populations and cannot be connected at an individual patient level. All of these data
are fit for a relatively small computer. Clinically, the data sets assembled are for a population
screening as well as an inpatient risk and a chronic physiology for monitoring, but with no patient
overlap, only a multimodal methodology and integration protocol are apparent, as is the open
reporting style throughout.
The data of each cohort is divided into three sets a training set, a validation set, and a test set, and the
ratio of splitting is dependent on the cohort; NHANES split 60:20:20; WESAD split 75:25, because
it's a proxy branch for physiology without CKD labels.
Table 3.3: Summary of datasets used in the multimodal framework.
Branch
Dataset
Unit
Total N
Features
Label definition
Population
clinical
NHANES
2013–
2014 [16]
Participant
4,702
74
eGFR < 60 mL/min/1.73
m² (CKD-
EPI 2021) [17], [18]
Hospital
EHR
(primary)
MIMIC-
IV v3.1 hosp
[6]
Admission
30,000
68
Admission-
level CKD composite
Wearable
physiology
(proxy)
WESAD [5]
Window
578 (15
subjects)
16 window
statistics
Stress vs baseline (not C
KD)
3.2.2
Data Preparation
A separate pipeline is used to process each of the datasets. In NHANES, the race-free CKD-EPI 2021
equation is used to calculate outcomes, with eGFR thresholds used to construct labels, outcome
highly-leaking columns such as raw creatinine and identifier columns that are used to create the label
are removed, values are median imputed, and a grouped train:validation:testing split of 60:20:20 is
used. The records for MIMIC-IV are merged on the basis of subject and admission id; for each of the
eight laboratory features, processing is done on the admission window, the processing transformations
are fit on the training partition of the data, and then applied to the validation and test data [6]. For
WESAD, the window size is set to 1920 samples, the stride is set to 960 samples, no more than 120
windows per subject will be segmented and the windows will be split using a 75/25 train–test partition.
The chosen method is grouped splitting which is labelling using a clinical approach. Random splitting
was also considered but rejected as it can give optimistic and clinically unrealistic performance
estimates due to the presence of records of the same subject or participant in multiple splits; The
problem of grouped splitting reduces the flexibility in the balance of the rare positive classes across
the splits but in the context of assessing a decision-support tool it is salient that the performance be
judged on unseen individuals [27]. The imputation method selected was chosen to be median
imputation as it is stable, transparent, and less likely to have information leakage between validation
portions and imputation models; however, it does not model feature correlations. In addition, the
NHANES targets are based on the creatinine cutoffs of the guideline-based staging logic and the
CKD-EPI labelling system was selected to avoid the use of arbitrary creatinine cutoffs. In the
